[Feat] add guide to debugging BPMN workflows (#121)
libremfg/rhize-docs: content/how-to/bpmn/debug-workflows.md

  "error": $err
  }
)
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab  "Output" %}}
```
{
  "name": "Rhize"
}
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

You can use this behavior to direct flows.
For example, an exclusive gateway may have a condition such as $exists(err) that flows into an error-handling condition.

### Define error boundary

The error boundary is an intermediate event that evaluates whether a task had an error.
To use an error boundary:
1. Attach an intermediate event to a task.
1. Select the wrench icon and choose the error boundary.
1. Attach an arrow to the event that directs flows if the node returns an error.

For example, this error boundary directs the control flow when a REST task returns an unexpected result.

{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-error-boundary.png"
alt="Screenshot of an error boundary that happens when a REST task returns a non-200 response."
caption="An error boundary that happens when a REST task returns a non-200 response."
width="35%"
>}}

### Create event logging

To persist error handling, you could also create gateways that use the `addEvent` GraphQL mutation to create a record of a point in the workflow in your manufacturing knowledge graph.

> This extra step both increases the observability of errors and facilitates future analysis.

Author: ```suggestion
This strategy increases the observability of errors and facilitates future analysis.
```

It may also be useful when combined with the debugging strategies described in the next section.

## Strategies to debug

For detailed debugging,

> you can use an embedded instance of Grafana Tempo to inspect the each step of the workflow, node by node.

Author: ```suggestion
you can use an embedded instance of [Grafana Tempo](https://github.com/grafana/tempo) to inspect each step of the workflow, node by node.
```

To debug on the fly, you may also find it useful to use `customResponse` and intermediate message throws to print variables and output at different checkpoints. 

### Debug from the API calls

When you first test or run a workflow, consider starting the testing and debugging process from an API trigger.

> Specifically, use the `createAndRunBpmnSync` operation to receive information about the workflow state, and the `customResponse` provides information about the last value.

Author: ```suggestion
All API triggers return information about the workflow state (for example `COMPLETED` or `ABORTED`).
With the `createAndRunBpmnSync` operation, you can also use the `customResponse` to provide information from the workflow's variable context.
```

For details of how this works, read the guide to [triggering workflows]({{< relref "trigger-workflows" >}}).

> The first information that indicates correctness are the `jobState` and, if set, `customResponse`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> The `jobState` reports if the workflow finishes, and the `customResponse` reports the value saved into this [special variable]({{< relref "special-variables" >}}) at the last completed node.
> For example, consider a workflow that has two nodes, a Message and a REST task.
> 1. When the message completes, the user writes `Message sent` into `customResponse` as an output variable.
> 1. When the REST task completes, the response is saved into `customResponse. 
> 
> So `customResponse` serves as a checkpoint to report the state of each node execution.
> Now imagine that the user has started the workflow from the API and receives this response:
> 

Author: ```suggestion
For example, consider a workflow that has two nodes, a Message throw event and a REST task.
1. When the message completes, the user writes `Message sent` into `customResponse` as an output variable.
1. When the REST task completes, the response is saved into `customResponse`. 

So the `jobState` property reports on the overall workflow status, and `customResponse` serves as a checkpoint to report the state of each node execution.
Now imagine that the user has started the workflow from the API and receives this response:

```

```
{
  "data": {
    "createAndRunBpmnSync": {
      "jobState": "ABORTED",
      "customResponse": "message sent",
      "traceID": "993ee32af9522f5b35b4ec80f4ff58a8"
    }
  }
}
```

Note how `ABORTED` indicates the workflow failed somewhere.

> Yet, `customResponse` indicates that the message was sent.

Author: ```suggestion
Yet, the value of `customResponse` must have been set after the message event executed.
```

So the problem is likely with the REST node.

You could also use a similar strategy with intermediate message events.

> However, these methods are the BPMN equivalent of `printf()` debugging and are limited.

Author: ```suggestion
However, while undoubtedly useful, these methods are also limited&mdash; the BPMN equivalents of `printf()` debugging.
```

For a full-featured debugging, use the `traceID` to explore the workflow through Tempo.

### Debug in Tempo

{{< notice "note" >}}
The instructions here provide the minimum about using Tempo as a tool.

> Refer to the [official documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/)
> to discover the many ways you can filter your BPMN traces for debugging and analysis.

Author: ```suggestion
To discover the many ways you can filter your BPMN traces for debugging and analysis,
refer to the [official documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/).
```

{{< /notice >}}

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Rhize creates a unique ID for each workflow that runs.
```

> This ID is reported as the `traceID` in the `createAndRunBPMN` mutation operations.

Author: ```suggestion
This ID is reported as the `traceID` in the `createAndRunBPMN` mutation operation.
```

Use this ID to debug the workflow in Tempo.

> To inspect a workflow:

Author: ```suggestion
To inspect a workflow in Tempo:
```

1. Go to your Grafana instance.
2. Select **Explore** and then Tempo.

> 3. From the **TraceQL** tab, enter the `traceID` and query. the **Search** tab with the `bpmn-engine` to find traces for all workflows.

Author: ```suggestion
3. From the **TraceQL** tab, enter the `traceID` and query.
Alternatively, use the **Search** tab with the `bpmn-engine` to find traces for all workflows.
```

{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-spans-in-tempo-compact.png"
alt="Screenshot of a compact view of spans for a BPMN process in Tempo"
caption="Screenshot of a compact view of spans for a BPMN process in Tempo"
width="55%"
>}}

> Each workflow instance displays _spans_ that trace the state of each node at its start, execution, and End states.

Author: ```suggestion
Each workflow instance displays _spans_ that trace the state of each node at its start, execution, and end states.
```

When debugging, you are likely interested in the spans that result in `ABORTED`. 
To inspect the errors:
1. Select the nodes with errors.
1. Use the `events` property to inspect for exceptions.

For example, this REST task failed because the URL was invalid.

{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-spans-in-tempo-compact.png"
alt="Screenshot of a detailed view of an error for a BPMN process in Tempo"
caption="A detailed view of an error for a BPMN process in Tempo"
width="55%"
>}}

> One more thing to note:
> check the names of the spans in the previous two screenshots.

Author: ```suggestion
Also note the names of the spans in the previous two screenshots.
```

> Note that the ones that convey semantic information are more easy find, understand, and follow.

Author: ```suggestion
Names that convey semantic information it easier to find specific nodes and easier to understand and follow the overall workflow.
```

> Aiding debugging is one of the reasons we recommend always following a set of [Naming conventions]({{< relref "naming-conventions" >}}).

Author: ```suggestion
Well-named nodes make debugging easier.
This is one of the reasons we recommend always following a set of [naming conventions]({{< relref "naming-conventions" >}}) when you author BPMN workflows.
```

### Adding the debug flag

For granular debugging, it also helps to trace the variable context as it passes from node to node.
To facilitate this, Rhize provides a debugging option that you can pass in multiple ways:
- From an API call with the `debug:true` [argument]({{< relref "/how-to/gql/call-the-graphql-api/#request-body" >}}).
- In the process variable context, by setting `__traceDebug: true`

> - In the [BPMN service configuration]({{< relref "/reference/service-config/bpmn-configuration/" >}}) by setting `OpenTelemetry.defaultDebug` to `true`.

Author: ```suggestion
- In the [BPMN service configuration]({{< relref "/reference/service-config/bpmn-configuration/" >}}) by setting `OpenTelemetry.defaultDebug` to `true`
```

---
title: Handle errors and debug
date: '2024-04-24T19:35:09+03:00'
categories: ["how-to"]
description: Strategies to handle errors in your BPMN workflows, and ways to debug workflows when things don't work as expected.
weight: 350
menu:
  main:
    parent: howto-bpmn
    identifier:
---

Errors come in two categories: expected and unexpected.
The Rhize BPMN engine has ways to handle both.

A robust workflow is going to have built-in logic to anticipate errors.

> For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits metrics and traces about its performance.

Reviewer: This is kinda pedantic, but the nodes themselves only emit traces. BPMN engine has code to provide execution metrics, but those are in the form of "I have executed 50 nodes" or "I have 10 nodes in my execution queue" rather than in the form of "this node took 50ms".

> For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits metrics and traces about its performance.

Author: ```suggestion
For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits  traces about its performance.
```

> For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits metrics and traces about its performance.

Author: ```suggestion
For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits traces to track its behavior performance.
```

> You can also use debug flags and variables to trace variable context as it transforms across the workflow.

Reviewer: Should "debug flags" be a link to how to do this?

For example, this schema requires that the input variables include a property `arr` whose
value  is an array of numbers.

```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
  "title": "Generated schema for Root",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": { "arr": { "type": "array", "items": { "type": "number" } } },
  "required": ["arr"]
}
```

In a production workflow, you might use this exact schema to validate the input for a function that calculates statistics (perhaps choosing a different variable name).

{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-json-schema.png"
alt="Screenshot of a conditional that branches when the JSON schema task receives invalid input."
caption="A conditional that branches when the JSON schema task receives invalid input. [Download the template](https://github.com/libremfg/bpmn-templates/tree/main/call-activity-calculate-stats)"
width="35%"
>}}

### JSONata conditions

Besides the logical gateway, it may make sense to use JSONata ternary expressions in one of the many parameters that accepts JSONata expressions.
For example, this expression creates one message body if `valid` is `true` and another if not:

```jsonata
=
{

>   "message": $.valid ? "Schema is valid" : "Invalid schema" 

Reviewer: This is also pedantic, but is the schema valid/invalid or the variable context? It looks to me like the schema is valid, but the variable context is invalid against the schema.

Author: Love these details :+1:

>   "message": $.valid ? "Schema is valid" : "Invalid schema" 

Author: ```suggestion
  "message": $.valid ? "payload is valid" : "Invalid payload" 
```

}
```

### Check JSONata output

If a field has no value, JSONata outputs nothing.
For example, the following expression outputs only `{"name": "Rhize"}`,
because no `$err` field exists.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab  "Expression" %}}
```json
=( 
  $name := "Rhize";

  { 
  "name": $name,
  "error": $err
  }
)
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab  "Output" %}}
```
{
  "name": "Rhize"
}
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

You can use this behavior to direct flows.
For example, an exclusive gateway may have a condition such as `$exists(err)` that flows into an error-handling condition.

> ### Define error boundary

Reviewer: It may be worth noting that there are some gotchas with error boundaries and parallel gateways.

In short, if you have a node with an error boundary between a pair of parallel gateways the error must eventually flow to the parallel merge gateway. This allows that gateway to see that all arms have completed and finish the merge. Without this the merge will never complete because it has n-1 arms' data.

If there is no merge, this can be ignored. The error event should simply hit an end event or rejoin processing like you normally would.

The error boundary is an intermediate event that evaluates whether a task had an error.
To use an error boundary:
1. Attach an intermediate event to a task.
1. Select the wrench icon and choose the error boundary.
1. Attach an arrow to the event that directs flows if the node returns an error.

For example, this error boundary directs the control flow when a REST task returns an unexpected result.

{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-error-boundary.png"

> alt="Screenshot of an error boundary that happens when a REST task returns a non-200 response."

Reviewer: This example doesn't actually work. The error boundary should only trigger or the node returning an `error` in Go land. A REST task that return 404 will simply set a `responseCode: 404` in it's variable context and happily continue executing.

An example of a rest task that would follow an error boundary would be one which tries to hit a server that is currently offline. That request will hang for `timeout` trying to connect then return an `error` that the server was unreachable.

Author: Thanks. Given this point and the part about parallel boundaries, I think I'm just going to leave out error boundaries for v1 of this doc. I want to make sure I can document the correct behavior.

I've made an issue to keep track.

https://github.com/libremfg/rhize-docs/issues/123

## Strategies to debug

For detailed debugging,
you can use an embedded instance of [Grafana Tempo](https://github.com/grafana/tempo) to inspect each step of the workflow, node by node.
To debug on the fly, you may also find it useful to use `customResponse` and intermediate message throws to print variables and output at different checkpoints. 

### Debug from the API calls

When you first test or run a workflow, consider starting the testing and debugging process from an API trigger.
All API triggers return information about the workflow state (for example `COMPLETED` or `ABORTED`).
With the `createAndRunBpmnSync` operation, you can also use the `customResponse` to provide information from the workflow's variable context.
For details of how this works, read the guide to [triggering workflows]({{< relref "trigger-workflows" >}}).

For example, consider a workflow that has two nodes, a Message throw event and a REST task.
1. When the message completes, the user writes `Message sent` into `customResponse` as an output variable.
1. When the REST task completes, the response is saved into `customResponse`. 

> So the `jobState` property reports on the overall workflow status, and `customResponse` serves as a checkpoint to report the state of each node execution.

Reviewer: For `createAndRunBPMNSync` you can also ask for the `DataJSON` attribute and get the entire variable context at the last node.

> So the `jobState` property reports on the overall workflow status, and `customResponse` serves as a checkpoint to report the state of each node execution.

Author: ```suggestion
So the `jobState` property reports on the overall workflow status, and `customResponse` serves as a checkpoint to report the state of each node execution.
You can also query for the `dataJSON` field, which reports the entire variable context at the last node.
```

Now imagine that the user has started the workflow from the API and receives this response:

```
{
  "data": {
    "createAndRunBpmnSync": {
      "jobState": "ABORTED",
      "customResponse": "message sent",
      "traceID": "993ee32af9522f5b35b4ec80f4ff58a8"
    }
  }
}
```

Note how `ABORTED` indicates the workflow failed somewhere.
Yet, the value of `customResponse` must have been set after the message event executed.
So the problem is likely with the REST node.

You could also use a similar strategy with intermediate message events.
However, while undoubtedly useful, these methods are also limited&mdash; the BPMN equivalents of `printf()` debugging.

> For a full-featured debugging, use the `traceID` to explore the workflow through Tempo.

Reviewer: Not sure if this is something we should document, but the `ID` and `traceID` should actually be the same these days.

Author: let's keep it trace id to not mudddy the waters :-)

To inspect the errors:
1. Select the nodes with errors.
1. Use the `events` property to inspect for exceptions.

For example, this REST task failed because the URL was invalid.

{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-spans-in-tempo-compact.png"
alt="Screenshot of a detailed view of an error for a BPMN process in Tempo"
caption="A detailed view of an error for a BPMN process in Tempo"
width="55%"
>}}

Also note the names of the spans in the previous two screenshots.
Names that convey semantic information it easier to find specific nodes and easier to understand and follow the overall workflow.
Well-named nodes make debugging easier.
This is one of the reasons we recommend always following a set of [naming conventions]({{< relref "naming-conventions" >}}) when you author BPMN workflows.

### Adding the debug flag

For granular debugging, it also helps to trace the variable context as it passes from node to node.
To facilitate this, Rhize provides a debugging option that you can pass in multiple ways:
- From an API call with the `debug:true` [argument]({{< relref "/how-to/gql/call-the-graphql-api/#request-body" >}}).

> - In the process variable context, by setting `__traceDebug: true`

Reviewer: Note: this doesn't work in v3.0.0, but will in the next release.

---
title: Handle errors and debug
date: '2024-04-24T19:35:09+03:00'
categories: ["how-to"]
description: Strategies to handle errors in your BPMN workflows, and ways to debug workflows when things don't work as expected.
weight: 350
menu:
  main:
    parent: howto-bpmn
    identifier:
---

Errors come in two categories: expected and unexpected.
The Rhize BPMN engine has ways to handle both.

A robust workflow is going to have built-in logic to anticipate errors.

> For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits  traces about its performance.

Author: ```suggestion
For unexpected issues, every node in a workflow is _instrumented_, meaning it emits traces so that you can observe its behavior and performance.
```

To debug on the fly, you may also find it useful to use `customResponse` and intermediate message throws to print variables and output at different checkpoints. 

### Debug from the API calls

When you first test or run a workflow, consider starting the testing and debugging process from an API trigger.
All API triggers return information about the workflow state (for example `COMPLETED` or `ABORTED`).
With the `createAndRunBpmnSync` operation, you can also use the `customResponse` to provide information from the workflow's variable context.
For details of how this works, read the guide to [triggering workflows]({{< relref "trigger-workflows" >}}).

For example, consider a workflow that has two nodes, a Message throw event and a REST task.
1. When the message completes, the user writes `Message sent` into `customResponse` as an output variable.
1. When the REST task completes, the response is saved into `customResponse`. 

So the `jobState` property reports on the overall workflow status, and `customResponse` serves as a checkpoint to report the state of each node execution.

> You can also query for the `dataJSON` field, which reports the entire variable context at the last node.

Author: ```suggestion
You can also request the `dataJSON` field, which reports the entire variable context at the last node.
```
